Detective Recapped here. Today, I’m going
to explain a Drama-Thriller film called:
"The Good Doctor," which highlights the dangers
of loneliness, ambition, and obsession. Despite
its anxious and mild-mannered protagonist, his
unexpected unpredictability takes the forefront.
With low stakes taken to extremes and
comeuppance always being an arm’s reach away,
the movie is quick to take several dark turns.
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
Some doctors say that you’re never truly
a doctor until you lose a patient. Little
does Martin Blake know, he’s about to find out
whether this sordid little saying is true or not.
Six days into his residency at a Southern
California hospital, British doctor Martin
Blake already feels the tension between him
and some of his colleagues. After examining
a patient who can’t speak English, two nurses
irritate Martin when one of them, Nurse Theresa,
asks him to read his own handwriting. The
other one, Nurse Maryanne, refuses to take
a patient's blood, saying he has to do it
himself since they're swamped. Taken aback,
Martin draws blood from his patient's arm while
crossly commenting to the patient’s mother that a
phlebotomist is supposed to do this, not a doctor.
Already, it’s clear that Martin feels undermined
in the hospital. And though he’s annoyed by
the dismissive way the nurses talk to him,
he still tries his best not to call them
out for their rude behavior. He's still
new at the place, and building a good
relationship with others can take time.
The next day, Martin visits his patient
from the previous day, Diane Nixon.
He tells the girl that she has pyelonephritis,
a UTI of the upper tract and kidney, and Diane
writes it down in her journal. During Diane's
check-up, Martin tells her that her condition can
get serious if not treated early. Diane asks if
she can die from that, and Martin assures her that
he has things under control. As they share some
lighthearted banter about doctors, Diane's mother
and sister, Valerie, arrive. After Martin informs
them of Diane's condition, her sister teases him
about how smart of a doctor he is. When Diane's
boyfriend, Rich, shows up, too, Martin can't help
but look at the dismissive boy with displeasure
before leaving the room. The almost flirty way the
sisters banter with Martin about his profession
isn’t lost on him. And with the constant crap
he’s getting from his colleagues, it’s a breath
of fresh air for him to be admired this way.
Still, Rich’s uncaring attitude towards
Martin is quick to bring him back to reality.
On his way out, Nurse Theresa asks him to confirm
that he wrote "penicillin" on his patient's admit
sheet before asking him to follow her. They
then go to the room of one of his patients,
Mr. Sanchez, where nurse Theresa tells Martin
that the man is allergic to penicillin.
Martin argues that it wasn't mentioned
in the patient's original admit sheet,
but when the nurse questions him if he asked
Mr. Sanchez, Martin says the patient doesn't
speak English. Annoyed, Martin demands to know why
she still gave Mr. Sanchez penicillin even though
she knew he was allergic to it, and Nurse Theresa
retorts that she only followed his instructions.
Instead of arguing with her, Martin instructs
her to prepare a Benadryl line for Mr. Sanchez,
but Nurse Theresa says she already took care of
it before walking away. As Martin follows her,
Nurse Theresa says she'll file an incident
report. Determined to prove he's right, Martin
starts looking for the original admit sheet,
but the nurse tells him he won't find it there.
Once again, Martin feels undermined by his
colleague with the way she’s openly putting
the blame on him and expressing ignorance over
the original admit sheet. It’s a little puzzling
why Nurse Theresa resents Martin, but it's clear
that there's something she doesn't like in him.
It may be the way he talks or carries himself, but
the nurse should be professional and set aside her
personal feelings. After all, it’s the patient
who’ll suffer the most from any medical faults.
During his break, Martin joins Dr. Waylans in
the cafeteria and expresses his concern about
the incident report involving Mr. Sanchez. Martin
is worried that it will affect his application
for the infectious diseases fellowship, but
knowing where their conversation is heading,
Mr. Waylans bluntly tells him he can't undo it.
The next day, Martin hears Diane arguing with Rich
over the phone as he enters her room. Martin then
checks her up, and as he does, Diane tells him she
wants to break up with her boyfriend. Martin says
it's none of his business, but Diane continues to
talk to him about Rich anyway. While they talk
and Martin advises Theresa what to do with Rich,
Nurse Theresa shows up and asks to speak with him.
Though Martin asserts that he’s with a patient,
Theresa ignores him and gives him his files,
saying she can't follow the orders on those
papers because she can't read his handwriting.
Later, Martin is inside an elevator, and he thinks
about his confrontation with the nurse. When
Jimmy, an orderly, enters the elevator, too,
he asks the doctor what's bothering him. Martin
then says he believes that the staff is supposed
to follow orders and show doctors some respect,
but Jimmy says it's probably not what he thinks.
When Martin asks how long Nurse Theresa has been
working there, Jimmy makes a joke and tells him
to just get rid of her by slipping something in
her food. At this point, Martin’s only getting
the respect he wants from Diane, who’s openly
consulting him with her problems. Nothing seems
to be going right for him there, and he can’t even
pull any strings to keep the incident report from
tainting his reputation. This may be another
hit to his ego, seeing as he’s not important
enough to play their workplace politics right.
And throughout all this, tensions keep rising
between him and Theresa as he feels like he’s not
getting the respect that he deserves from her.
Before his shift ends, Martin visits a sleeping
Diane and finds flowers from Rich in her room.
When Diane wakes up, she quickly closes her
journal and asks what's his deal with Nurse
Theresa. Martin assures her they just had a
misunderstanding, but Diane implies the nurse
should be fired for disrespecting him, making
Martin smile. When Martin tells Diane she's all
better, the girl gets sad that she doesn't have
to stay at the hospital any longer and that she
won't receive any of his helpful bits of advice.
Instead of answering, Martin only smiles at her,
and Diane says she'll tell Nurse Theresa that he's
a good doctor. Although they won't say anything,
it is pretty clear that Martin and Diane
are attracted to each other. But since
Martin’s already established that he
values his profession a good deal,
he’s not about to jeopardize it further by getting
too close for comfort with a patient. Still,
Diane gives him the ego boost he’s been missing
out on since he started working at the hospital.
During the doctors' morning briefing, Dr.
Waylans informs Martin he's discharging Diane.
When Martin asks if he could let her stay another
day, Dr. Waylans says he's already signed her out.
Sure enough, Martin finds Diane's room empty, and
as he's about to leave, Diane's father shows up
and asks him for any last-minute advice. Martin
tells him to make sure Diane finishes her pills
since she could relapse, and Mr. Nixon says he
will. He then invites Martin to dinner, saying
Diane has taken a liking to him and wants to
express her gratitude for his taking care of her.
Martin accepts the invitation, and Mr. Nixon gives
him his address before thanking him and leaving.
The timing for Mr. Nixon’s invitation can’t be
any better for Martin. Now that Diane isn’t his
patient anymore, he probably thinks that
it won’t be inappropriate to befriend her.
Still, it almost feels like Martin
is overstepping his boundaries as
a doctor by asking if he could
let Diane stay for another day.
At the Nixons' house, Martin meets Diane's other
sibling, Donny, then learns that Diane has left to
talk to Rich. At the dinner table, the Nixons ask
Martin about his work, and Martin casually answers
them. While eating, Donny teases Valerie, and the
girl accidentally spills wine on herself. Upset,
Valerie walks out of the dining room,
and Mr. Nixon grabs Donny by the hair,
telling him to stop misbehaving. Embarrassed,
Mrs. Nixon apologizes to Martin, but the doctor
says it's fine. He then excuses himself and asks
where the bathroom is, and on his way there,
he accidentally opens the door to Valerie's room
and sees her getting dressed. When Martin finally
finds the bathroom, he stares at himself in the
mirror and sees Diane's antibiotics in the closet.
After washing up, Martin goes to Diane's room and
looks around before finally picking up a framed
photograph of her. Wanting to go, Martin tells the
Nixons that something came up at the hospital and
leaves. Martin is disappointed that Diane isn't
home, but he keeps quiet about it. Diane is the
sole reason why Martin accepted her father's
invitation in the first place, and eating with
her family without her makes the night too long
for him. When Martin sees Diane's medication in
the closet, his facial expression suddenly changes
as if he just thought of something brilliant.
When Martin arrives home, he takes out Diane's
photograph that he's stolen from her room.
The following day, Dr. Waylans talks to Martin
about his first year of residency at the hospital.
Dr. Waylans asks Martin why he became a doctor and
if it's what he truly wants, and Martin says he
saw how well-respected his mother's doctor friend
was. Martin tells him he wanted to earn that kind
of respect from his colleagues but admits to
having a hard time, especially when it comes to
getting along with Nurse Theresa. Martin expresses
his frustration, saying the nurse treats him as if
he's a nobody. He then assures the doctor that
it's what he wants in life and promises to do
better. In the cafeteria, Martin observes how
the other doctors and nurses seem to be getting
along just fine. While doctors don’t need to have
the noblest intentions as long as they do their
job right, it’s increasingly evident just how
important respect is to Martin. In fact, it’s the
most important thing to him. Although he doesn't
want to come off as a whiny person, it is obvious
that he wants Dr. Waylans to see how unhappy
he is with the way Nurse Theresa treats him.
He receives a call from Valerie, asking him if
he wants her to bring the gift basket her mother
has prepared for him to the hospital or if he'd
rather pick it up from their house. Of course,
Martin goes to their place and greets Mrs. Nixon
before asking if he could use the bathroom. There,
Martin replaces the contents of Diane's pills with
sugar and cleans up before taking the gift from
Mrs. Nixon. The cracks in Martin’s supposed
professionalism are fully showing now. His
decision to steal Diane's photograph and tamper
with her medicine shows a growing obsession.
Worst of all, he’s willing to jeopardize his
former patient’s health just to get his way.
Sometime later, Diane relapses and goes back to
the hospital. After telling Diane that they have
to run more tests on her, Martin sees Jimmy in
the hallway, who is a little too happy that Diane
is back. Disgusted, Martin tells Jimmy to mind
his manners before seeing the doctors and nurses
rushing to Mr. Sanchez's room. The staff finds
him having another allergic reaction, and Martin
learns that the patient is allergic to vancomycin
and not penicillin. Later that day, Martin points
out to Dr. Waylans that what happened to Mr.
Sanchez could actually be Nurse Theresa's
fault and not his. Dr. Waylans promises to look
into it, and when he notes that Diane is back,
Martin pretends to be nonchalant about it, saying
he'll do some tests to make sure she's okay.
At this point, it is evident that Martin has
no problem lying. He must be confident that no
evidence will be traced back to him, so he talks
to Dr. Waylans about Diane's condition without
even stuttering. Aside from that, Martin is
a hypocrite too, for telling Jimmy to stop
talking about Diane in a disrespectful way when
he himself is obsessing over her. In the evening,
Martin visits Diane in her room and finds out that
she and Rich are over. He then promises the girl
that she'll be better soon, but Diane shows
reluctance to leave the hospital. Once again,
Martin tampers with Diane's medication, and as
he hurriedly leaves her room, he bumps into Nurse
Maryanne. The nurse admits that she's just been
fired for messing up Mr. Sanchez's admit sheet.
Nurse Maryanne says Nurse Theresa doesn't know
anything about it, and with nothing else to say,
Martin goes to the bathroom. There, he disposes of
everything he used on Diane's IV. After learning
that Diane is running a fever the next day,
Martin decides to replace her IV again. He goes
to the medicine storage room, where he finds Jimmy
hooking up with a patient. After telling them to
leave, Martin proceeds to get Diane's medication,
and for the third time, he tampers with it. Nurse
Theresa shows up as Martin finishes replacing
Diane's IV, but the nurse doesn't seem to suspect
him of doing anything wrong. Before going home,
Martin goes to the laboratory and replaces her
resistance culture test. Martin is desperate to
keep Diane close to him, and he is willing to take
extreme measures to do it. He doesn't even take
into consideration that he might be putting the
girl's life in danger. Instead, he focuses on
wanting to be with the girl who makes him feel
good about himself. It's selfish of Martin to do
this to Diane, because even if she likes him back,
he has no right to play with her health
as if it means nothing to him, a doctor.
In the morning, Dr. Waylans and Martin discuss
what they should do with Diane. After Martin
informs Diane of her condition, the girl asks if
he could operate on her just in case she needs an
operation. However, Martin tells her he doesn't
operate since he doesn't want to cut into people.
Rich then calls Diane, but Diane won't answer her
phone, so Martin tells her not to think about the
boy too much. When Martin sees Rich in the
hallway, he immediately closes the curtain
in Diane's room and greets Rich. Martin tells him
Diane can't take any visitors, and no matter how
much Rich insists on seeing her, the doctor won't
let him. Defeated, Rich asks Martin to give the
balloon he's brought to Diane, and after taking
it, Martin pops the balloon and throws it away.
It's safe to say that Martin is jealous of Rich.
Not only did he stop him from seeing Diane, but
he also stops him from having a chance to patch
things up with her. It's a little petty, and it
drives the point home that Martin wants Diane all
to himself, even at the cost of her own happiness.
One night, Diane admits to sleeping with Rich
before finishing her medication. She's worried
that that's the reason why she's sick again, but
Martin assures her that it's not. The girl is
scared that she might die, and Martin just tells
her that that’s not going to happen. Without a
thought, Diane says she's always thought of dying
by getting shot while stopping a crime, and Martin
can only look at her. She then asks him if he's
ever thought of stuff like that, and Martin says
when he was young, he used to think about going
into the ocean and disappearing as if he never
existed. In a sad voice, Diane tells him she loves
the ocean, and once again, Martin can only nod at
her. Martin probably doesn't expect that Diane
will be sad at the hospital. He's so focused on
making sure she doesn't leave that he's never
given a thought about her feelings. Because of
Martin, Diane's physical and emotional conditions
are deteriorating, but he chooses to ignore them.
Before Diane’s operation, he assures
her that everything is going to be fine.
Once it’s done, Martin makes sure that he's the
first person Diane sees when she opens her eyes.
Diane asks if he is married or has a girlfriend,
but Martin doesn't really answer her question.
When Diane mentions that she thought he
liked Valerie, Martin shakes her this.
Diane tells him that’s good before falling
back to sleep. Unable to control himself,
Martin kisses the unconscious girl,
and when he comes back to his senses,
Martin looks around to check if anyone saw
him. Eventually, Martin falls asleep. Later,
a nurse wakes up Martin, and after realizing
that Diane isn't in her room, Martin angrily
asks Nurse Theresa where she is. Martin is worried
after receiving a Code Four, and when he learns
Diane has been taken for an MRI, he immediately
makes his way there. By the time he arrived,
he finds the doctors trying to revive Diane, but
unfortunately, it's already too late for her.
With tears in his eyes, Martin stares at Diane's
lifeless body and realizes that he's gone too far.
A sweet, young girl has lost her life because of a
selfish doctor, who wanted nothing more than to be
with her. If only Martin had thought of other ways
to keep seeing Diane, her life wouldn't have been
cut short. He can keep being sorry until he’s blue
in the face, but he only has himself to blame.
With patients dying daily at the hospital, Martin
has no other choice but to continue with his life.
Later on, Mr. Nixon shows up at the hospital
and accuses Martin of killing Diane.
Nurse Theresa is quick to call Jimmy and
the security guard to stop any fighting.
When Dr. Waylans arrives, he assures the grieving
father that they did everything they could to save
his daughter. Martin remains speechless
the whole time, and as Mr. Nixon leaves,
Dr. Waylans apologizes to him for having to deal
with that. It isn't surprising that Mr. Nixon has
reacted the way he did. Diane was fine one day,
and the next, she wasn't. Sadly, Mr. Nixon has
no proof that Martin did commit a crime, so he
can only hate the doctor from afar. Meanwhile,
Martin must be secretly scared, for his reckless
actions are starting to cause him trouble.
One day, Jimmy asks Martin to meet him in the east
tower basement. There, he shows Martin Diane's
journal. Jimmy reveals that he’s read through it,
and he surmises that she and Martin must have had
some sort of special relationship. He blackmails
Martin into prescribing him certain medicine,
or else he’ll turn it over to his superiors.
Threatened, Martin concedes to Jimmy and
writes the prescription for him. However, Martin
won't just let Jimmy bully him, so he painted a
different kind of pill to make it look like the
one Jimmy is asking for before giving it to him.
Martin then asks for the journal,
but Jimmy refuses to hand it over.
Outsmarting Jimmy, Martin puts poison in Jimmy's
pills. After the orderly takes one pill inside the
hospital premises, Martin lures him into a storage
room for fear that someone might see him dead.
There, Jimmy starts coughing and realizes
he's been poisoned, and Martin stops him
when he tries to leave. As Jimmy starts having
a seizure, Dr. Waylans arrive and tends to him.
During the chaos, Martin manages to take
Jimmy's locker keys. When he finally dies,
Martin goes to the orderly's locker and steals
Diane's journal. It speaks volumes about Martin
when he would go straight to murdering someone for
getting in his way. Of course, he’d be averse to
having his superiors investigating him in any way
about Diane. Still, he could have bided his time
and explored his options before even considering
killing a person. Then again, Martin’s an extreme
guy who immediately goes through extreme measures.
If he weren’t, then Diane would still be alive.
During an investigation, Detective
Krauss asks Martin what happened,
and he lies about trying to help Jimmy when he
started having a seizure. Dr. Waylans believes
Jimmy's death has something to do with substance
abuse, which is obvious to him because of his
erratic behavior. Dr. Waylans then gives Martin
some time off, and Martin is glad to accept it.
At home, Martin reads Diane's journal and learns
that the girl had not once mentioned him there.
It almost becomes questionable if she ever liked
him in the first place, or if she just saw him
as a wiser figure to look up to. The next day,
Dr. Krauss unexpectedly drops by Martin's house
and asks him questions about Jimmy. He tells
Martin that the pills Jimmy took were spiked
with potassium cyanide, but Martin acts clueless
about it. The detective continues to question
Martin about his relationship with Jimmy and
if he knows where the orderly got the pills.
All the while, Martin remains unaware that
Diane's journal sits on the floor. As he
answers the detective’s questions, Martin seems
a bit distracted and starts talking about Diane,
saying they were close. He then adds that Jimmy
used to make lewd comments about female patients,
which is one of the main reasons why he never
mingled with him. When Martin finally notices
Diane's journal, he excuses himself from the room
and takes the notebook with him to the bathroom.
As a doctor, it was careless of Martin not to
realize that potassium cyanide won't be traced
in Jimmy's system. Then again, Martin isn’t
known for his carelessness. What he’s good at,
though, is using his smarts to get himself
out of the trouble he caused, and this time,
he uses Diane as a reason to be too distracted
to answer the detective’s questions.
Martin tries flushing the torn
papers from the diary in the toilet,
but it only clogs and overflows. Panicking,
Martin escapes through the bathroom window
and climbs down a tree before heading
to the beach just outside his house.
There, Martin contemplates whether he should
end his life, but he decides against it.
Instead, he goes back to his apartment through
his bathroom window and cleans the mess he made.
Once he’s done, he goes to tell Detective
Krauss he's needed at the hospital.
After some time, Martin goes
back to his work at the hospital.
There, he assures a little girl that he's
getting better at drawing blood from a patient.
Martin is a man of many extremes. He wanted the
respect of people, so he went for being a doctor.
He wanted to get closer to Diane, so he messed
with her medication to trap her in the hospital.
He wanted to get Jimmy off his back, he
murdered him. When he saw Diane’s journal,
he flushed it down the toilet and contemplated
ending his life. He hardly stops to consider
less drastic measures, and this could be
a symptom of his deeper insecurities or a
belief that he has no one that he can count
on. Perhaps Martin is just the way he is.
Still, the fact that Martin is able to resume
his work at the hospital as if he didn't just
kill two people is unbelievable. It's frightening
to think that doctors like him roam the hospitals,
offering services to helpless patients.
No matter how good he is at his job,
Martin shouldn't forget that he took two innocent
lives and that one day, he'll pay for them.